W H I T E  PA P E R      |         W P0 0 3

Reliable, Low Power Wireless Sensor Networks for the  
Internet of Things: Making Wireless Sensors as Accessible 
as Web Servers
Ross Yu, Product Marketing Manager
Thomas Watteyne, Senior Networking Design Engineer
Dust Networks ® Product Group, Linear Technology ® Corp.

The Internet of Things revolution is upon us, and by the year 2020, there 
will be over 50 billion connected things in the world. With the world’s 
population increasing and resources becoming more precious, this 
interconnection promises to supply real-world data to drive higher 
efficiencies and to streamline business practices.  

With the wide acceptance of Internet Proto-
col (IP), it is becoming easier to process data 
and  make  meaningful  use  of  information. 
Fortune  500  companies  provide  enterprise-
level  database  solutions  for  data  storage 
and  software  tools  to  streamline  business 
processes,  such  as  asset  tracking,  process 
control  systems,  and  building  management 
systems  (see  Figure  1).  Smart  phones  and 

tablets  provide  people  with  useful  and  ac-
tionable  information,  such  as  live  parking  
information  or  real-time  machine  health 
monitoring  to  inform  maintenance  sched- 
ules.  And,  while  there  are  wireless  sensors  
in  place  today,  there  is  a  hunger  for  more 
sensor  data 
to  measure  and  optimize  
processes  that  have  not  been  previously  
measured. 

Figure 1. Making IP-Enabled Wireless Sensors Reliable and 
Low Power Will Enable Widespread Usage

1   |    www.linear.com

To  further  enable  wide  scale  deployment  of 
sensors, IP standards efforts are underway, 
with the goal of making small wireless sen-
sors as easy to access as web servers. These 
efforts  are  the  confluence  of  two  driving 
forces: the proven low power, highly reliable 
performance of time-synchronized mesh net-
works, and the ongoing IP standards efforts 
for seamless integration into the Internet. To-
gether these forces will drive relatively small, 
low power sensors that communicate reliably 
and are IP-enabled.

Wireless Sensor Network Challenges
Since  wireless  is  unreliable  by  nature,  it  is 
important to understand the sources of unre-
liability to be able to account for them in com-
munication  systems.  In  low  power  wireless 
networks,  the  main  sources  of  unreliability 
are external interference and multipath fading. 
Interference  occurs  when  an  external  signal 
(e.g., Wi-Fi) temporarily prevents two radios 
from  communicating.  This  requires  them  to 
retransmit, hence, to consume more power. 
Multipath  fading  happens  when  a  wireless 
signal  bounces  off  objects  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  transmitter,  and  the  various  echoes  de-
structively interfere at the receiver’s antenna. 
This  phenomenon  is  a  function  of  the  posi-
tion  of  the  devices,  the  frequency  used  and 
the  surrounding  environment.  Because  the 
surrounding  environment  of  any  wireless 
system  changes  over  time,  any  single  RF 
frequency  channel  will  experience  problems 
over the operational life of a wireless system.1  
 

1   See the accompanying sidebar article, The Effects of Multipath Fading 

on Wireless Communications

wp003fReliable, Low Power Wireless Sensor Networks for the Internet of Things: Making Wireless Sensors as Accessible as Web ServersHowever,  multipath  fading 
is  frequency- 
dependent.  Therefore,  while  one  frequency 
may be experiencing a problem, there will be 
several other RF frequency channels that work 
well.  Because  of  interference  and  multipath 
fading,  the  key  to  building  a  reliable  wire-
less  system  is  to  employ  channel  and  path 
diversity without sacrificing low power opera-
tion. Such a system was pioneered by Dust 
Networks  (now  part  of  Linear  Technology)  
with its time-synchronized, channel-hopping 
mesh networking. 

Time-Synchronized, Channel-Hopping  
Mesh Networks
time-synchronized,  channel-hopping 
In  a 
mesh  network,  all  wireless  nodes  across  a 
multihop network are synchronized to within 
a few tens of microseconds, and time is sliced 
into time slots. Communication is orchestrat-
ed by a schedule which indicates to each node 
what to do (transmit, receive, sleep) in each 
time  slot.  Because  they  are  synchronized, 
each  node  switches  on  its  radio  only  when 
communicating,  thereby  significantly  reduc-
ing their radio duty cycle (<1% is common-
place)  and  increasing  their  battery  lifetime. 
Furthermore, since the schedule is flexible, the 
network is always available to the application, 
unlike  other  “sleepy”  network  architectures  

that  completely  shut  down  the  network  for 
extended  periods  of  time.  Each  packet  sent 
between two nodes is done so on a frequency 
calculated  using  a  pseudo-random  hopping 
pattern.  The  resulting  frequency  diversity  is 
an  effective  way  of  combating  interference 
and  multipath 
fading.  Time-synchronized 
mesh  networks  enable  a  decade  of  battery 
lifetime and >99.999% end-to-end reliability.

Time-Synchronized Mesh 
Networking Successes
Time-synchronized,  channel-hopping  mesh 
networks have already been widely deployed 
for several years. Dust Networks introduced 
its first SmartMesh® system in 2004 and the 
industrial  process  industry  was  one  of  the 
earliest adopters. 
Industrial  applications  have  some  of  the 
harshest  operating  environments,  yet  have 
the most stringent demand for data integrity, 
which, when assured, significantly improves 
efficiency, productivity and safety of industri-
al plants. Because traditional wired industrial 
sensors are expensive to install, only a small 
fraction  of  potential  measurement  points  in 
a  plant  are  traditionally  instrumented.  While 
this  creates  significant  demand  for  wireless 
in  industrial  applications,  traditional  point-
to-point  wireless  systems  lack  the  required  

The Effects of Multipath Fading on Wireless 
Communications 
Multipath fading depends on the position and 
nature of every object in the environment, and 
is  unpredictable  in  any  practical  setup.  One 
good property is that the topography depicted 
in  Figure  A1  changes  with  the  frequency. 
That is, if a packet is not received because of 
multipath fading, retransmitting on a different 
frequency has a high probability of succeeding.

PDR
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

20

15

10

x (cm)

5

5

0

0

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

35

30

25

20

y (cm)

15

10

Figure A1. Multipath Fading Causes the Quality 
of a Link to Vary Dramatically, Even When Moving 
the Receiver by Only a Couple of Centimeters

Because  objects  in  the  environment  are  not 
static, i.e., cars drive by and doors are opened 
and  closed,  the  effect  of  multipath  changes 
over time.  Figure A2 shows the packet delivery 
ratio  on  a  single  wireless  path  between  two 
industrial  sensors  over  the  course  of  26 
days,  and  for  each  of  the  16  channels  used 
by the system. There are weekly cycles where 
workdays and weekends are clearly visible. At 
any given time, some channels are good (high 
delivery),  others  bad,  and  still  others  highly 
varying.  Channel  17,  while  generally  good, 
has  at  least  one  period  of  zero  delivery.  Each 
path in the network shows qualitatively similar 
behavior, but unique channel performance, and 
there  is  never  any  one  channel  that  is  viable 
everywhere in the network.

Because  of  interference  and  multipath  fading, 
the key to building a reliable wireless system is 
to exploit channel and path diversity.

l

e
n
n
a
h
C
4

 

.

5
1

.

2
0
8
E
E
E

I

26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11

0

5

10

15

Time (Days)

20

25

30

Figure A2. The Packet Delivery Ratio of a 
Wireless Link Evolves Over Time

Figure 2. Streetline Networks Has Deployed Time-Synchronized Channel 
Hopping Networks to Improve Parking in Such Cities as Hollywood, California.

2   |    www.linear.com

wp003fReliable, Low Power Wireless Sensor Networks for the Internet of Things: Making Wireless Sensors as Accessible as Web Serversreliability  and  are  difficult  to  install,  limiting 
their use to small, isolated applications. 
With  the  introduction  of  time-synchronized 
mesh networks, low power wireless systems 
that  deliver  the  reliability  normally  associ-
ated with wired systems became a reality. Its 
standardization  into  the  industrial  standard, 
IEC62591 (also known as WirelessHART) es-
tablished interoperability within the industrial 
process market. Most of the major industrial 
manufacturers,  such  as  Emerson  Process, 
Siemens,  ABB,  Endress  &  Hauser,  Pepperl 
&  Fuchs,  and  Phoenix  Contact  are  shipping 
WirelessHART  products.  Today,  SmartMesh 
networks  have  been  widely  accepted,  with 
30,000 networks deployed in over 120 coun-
tries around the world to improve safety and 
efficiency  in  a  variety  of  locations,  ranging 
from steel mills and refineries to remote oil 
fields and offshore platforms to food and bev-
erage plants.2 
Beyond 
industry, 
the 
SmartMesh systems have been successfully 
deployed  in  data  centers  and  commercial 
buildings to optimize air conditioning costs.3 
Streetline Networks 4  is a smart parking pro-
vider  that  monitors  the  real-time  availabil-
ity  of  urban  parking  spaces  (see  Figure  2).  
Vehicle detectors are installed beneath park-
ing  spaces,  inside  the  pavement  and  flush 
with  the  roadway.  This  brings  challenges, 
as  the  antenna  for  the  sensor  device  is  
located  underground,  and  then  covered  by 
a metal vehicle when the space is occupied.   
Applications  such  as 
these,  previously 
thought impossible or impractical, are being 
deployed  with  time-synchronized,  channel-
hopping mesh networks.

industrial  process 

A Standards-Based World
Standards play an important role in network-
ing technology, with end users advocating the 
development  of  standards-based  solutions. 
Knowing  that  a  technology  has  been  devel-
oped  and  approved  by  a  major  standards 
organization  inspires  confidence.  And  while 
WirelessHART/IEC62591 
the  standard 
in  industrial  process,  beyond  that  market,  
Internet Protocol (IP) is the communications 
standard. 
All devices connected to the Internet use IP to 
communicate with each another. Each device 

is 

2   www2.emersonprocess.com/en-US/plantweb/wireless/applications/

Pages/Wireless-Applications.aspx

3   Vigilent:  www.linear.com/docs/41384
4   Streetline Networks: www.linear.com/docs/41387

3   |    www.linear.com

Figure 3. IP Protocol Stack for Low Power, Reliable Wireless Sensor Networks

acquires an IP address which unambiguous-
ly  identifies  it  on  the  Internet.  Data  packets 
exchanged contain an IP header, a series of 
bytes that encode the addresses of the device 
that  created  the  packet,  and  the  destination 
device.  Many  other  protocols  are  needed  to 
form a protocol stack (TCP, HTTP, etc.), but 
the IP protocol is the common denominator. 
Allowing low power mesh networking devices 
to connect to the Internet using the IP proto-
col represented a major contribution toward 
development of the Internet of Things.
Several  standardization  bodies  have  devel-
oped  standards  for  the  Internet  of  Things 
(see  Figure  3).  The  challenge  is  to  enable 
full  Internet  integration,  while  incorporating 
the  proven  principles  of  time-synchronized,  
channel-hopping mesh networking. Within the 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)— the  
standards body behind most protocols used 
in today’s Internet— the CoRE working group 
has  defined  the  Constrained  Application  
Protocol  (CoAP)  application  layer  protocol. 
CoAP  runs  on  top  of  UDP  (User  Datagram 
Protocol)  and  is  easily  translated  to  HTTP 
for web-like interaction with wireless sensor 
nodes. The 6LoWPAN working group has de-
fined an IP adaptation layer that compresses 
an IP packet’s large headers into small wire-
less frames or data packets, allowing sensor 
nodes  to  be  individually  addressable  by  IP 
addresses.  While  these  upper  layers  enable 
web-like interaction and Internet integration, 
it  is  the  protocol  layers  beneath  them  that 

determine the quality of the wireless sensor 
network communications. 
The  standards  developed  by  the  IETF  typi-
cally  run  on  radio  chips  that  comply  with 
the  IEEE802.15.4  standard.  IEEE802.15.4 
provides  a  healthy  trade-off  between  data 
rate  (250kbps),  range  (10s  to  100s  of  me-
ters),  power  consumption  (5mA  to  20mA 
when  transmitting  or  receiving)  and  packet 
size (up to 127 bytes). This trade-off makes 
IEEE802.15.4 a good fit for low power mesh 
technology, and has therefore become the de 
facto link technology for those networks.
In  2012,  the  IEEE  published  a  new  medium 
access  standard  to  run  on  IEEE802.15.4-
compliant  radios,  known  as  IEEE802.15.4e. 
Its  Time  Slotted  Channel  Hopping  (TSCH) 
mode incorporates principles from Dust Net-
works’  time-synchronized  mesh  protocol  to 
enable  precise  time-slotted  synchronization 
and RF channel hopping. 
While  IEEE802.15.4e  defines  the  mecha-
nism  for  two  nodes  to  establish  a  synchro-
nized data packet transfer, it does not define 
how each node is assigned a schedule. The 
communication  schedule  affords  a  TSCH 
network the flexibility to match the commu-
nication  needs  of  the  nodes  in  the  network  
(see Figure 4). For example, a network can be 
configured for small networks with low data 
rates and extremely low power consumption, 
as is common in remote environmental moni-
toring. The same network can be configured 

wp003fReliable, Low Power Wireless Sensor Networks for the Internet of Things: Making Wireless Sensors as Accessible as Web Serversas a large network, optimized for faster data 
throughput. In addition, an automatically as-
signed yet flexible schedule enables a TSCH 
network to adapt to the surrounding environ-
ment. Specifically, network functions such as 
self-healing,  routing  optimization  and  load 
balancing are enabled by scheduling and are 
critical  to  delivering  high  performance  over 
the  life  of  a  network.  Solutions  for  building 
and assigning the TSCH schedule can be de-
veloped, but until standards are established, 
such solutions will not be interoperable over 
the air.
This is, however, changing with a new stan-
dards activity inside the IETF known as IPv6 
over  the  TSCH  mode  of  IEEE802.15.4e.5  
(6TiSCH).  Co-chaired  by  Linear  Technology 

and  Cisco  Systems,  this  activity  will  define 
the missing communication protocols to al-
low  the  TSCH  schedule to be managed by a 
scheduling entity. 
By  closing  this  remaining  gap  in  the  IP  
protocol  stack,  6TiSCH  will  enable  fully  
standardized,  interoperable  IP-based  wire-
less  sensor  networks  that  deliver  the  level 
of  reliability  typically  associated  with  wires.  
Web developers will be able to request real- 
time sensor data by making web requests to 
the  IP  address  of  a  sensor,  and  the  under-
lying  wireless  sensor  network  will  support 
such  communications  with  >99.999%  data 
reliability.  By  making  sensors  as  easily  ac-
cessed as web servers, wireless sensor net-
works will feed real-world information to the  
Internet of Things.

5   http://tools.ietf.org/wg/6tisch/

Figure 4. Small TSCH-Based Wireless 
Nodes, Such as the LTP5901-IPM from 
Linear Technology, Deliver 5 to 10 Years of 
Battery Life With >99.999% Data Reliability

4   |    www.linear.com

L, LT, LTC, LTM, Linear Technology, Dust Networks, SmartMesh 
and the Linear logo are registered trademarks of Linear Technology 
Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their 
respective owners. 

wp003fReliable, Low Power Wireless Sensor Networks for the Internet of Things: Making Wireless Sensors as Accessible as Web ServersLinear Technology Corporation 1630 McCarthy Blvd.  Milpitas, CA 95035-7417 Tel: 408 432-1900 • FAX: (408) 434-0507 • www.linear.comInformation furnished by Linear Technology Corporation is believed to be  accurate and reliable. However, no responsibility is assumed for its use.  Linear Technology Corporation makes no representation that the interconnect- ion of its circuits as described herein will not infringe on existing patent rights.LT 1213 • PRINTED IN USA  LINEAR TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION 2013